# Magic

## Counter-Spelling
If a [spellcaster](classes/Spellcaster.md) ([core](Glossary.md#Core-Class) or [hybrid](Glossary.md#Hybrid-Class)) can observe another character casting a spell (both see and hear), the observing mage may use their [Reaction](Combat.md#Reactions) to attempt to counter the spell being cast.  To do so, the counter-spelling mage decides how many **Invocation Dice** they wish to commit to the counter-spell (referred to hereafter as a "bid").  The original caster then has the chance to increase the number of their own **Invocation Dice** to attempt to complete the spell.  This process goes back-and-forth until both mages stop bidding (due to not wanting to commit more dice or simply not having any more dice available).  At that point, both mages MUST roll all the dice they bid.  The casting mage must meet or exceed both the spell's **DT** and the counter-spelling mage's total in order to successfully cast the spell.  Invocation Dice expend as normally after the outcome has been determined.

*Example:  An adventuring party has come across a tribe of wild gnolls, including a shaman.  The gnoll shaman ([Fighter-Spellcaster](classes/Fighter-Spellcaster.md): Lvl 5, Wis 13, 5 Invocation Dice) attempts to cast a rank 1 spell (DT 4) at the party using 2 dice.  Ekard (the party [Spellcaster](classes/Spellcaster.md); Lvl 5, Wis 16, 7 Invocation Dice) decides to counter-spell it, bidding 3 dice.  In response, the shaman increases their own bid to 4 dice and Ekard then response by upping his bid to 5 dice (note that, at this point, neither party knows how many dice the other has in reserve).  The gnoll matches the bid of 5 dice (which is their limit) and Ekard goes to 6.  Finally, the GM indicates that the gnoll will not go any higher and both parties roll.  The gnoll gets lucky and rolls 6+5+5+4+3=23, which is more than enough to beat the spell's DT.  Ekard doesn't roll as well, getting 5+5+5+3+2+1=21.  As the gnoll's total exceeds both the spell DT and Ekard's total, the spell is successfully cast.  Additionally, none of the gnoll's invocation dice are expended (as they're all 3+) but 2 of Ekard's dice do (the '1' and '2').  At least Ekard didn't roll a Mishap.*

### Spell Duels
If they wish to take the risk, either side in a counter-spelling scenario may attempt to force a spell duel.  In a spell duel, both mage's Invocation Dice will be expended if their faces show '1', '2' or '3' (rather than '1' or '2' as normal).  Additionally, the loosing mage will take 1d4 Psychic feedback damage per invocation die that they bid.

Once a spell-duel has been declared, the other mage has a choice: either abandon the spell/counter-spell or take part in the duel.  If they choose to abandon, they do not roll any Invocation Dice and the spell/counter-spell simply fails.  This allows them to escape without expending any dice or taking any psychic feedback damage at the cost of the other side winning.  The mage that declared the duel, however, MUST still roll their Invocation Dice and risk expending those dice and causing a [Mishap](#Mishaps) (though they cannot loose and thus won't take any psychic feedback damage).

*Example:  The next day, same adventuring party encounters the evil mage Bargle ([Spellcaster](classes/Spellcaster.md); Lvl 7, Wis 18, 10 Invocation Dice) who attempts to hit the party with his Fireball spell (DT 12).  He commits 4 dice to the roll.  Ekard, recognizing the spell through a successful [Spell Identification](#Spell-Identification) check, attempts to counter this and bids 5 dice.  Bargle, being the arrogant prick that he is, decides to force a Spell Duel and ups his bid to 6 dice.  Ekard, knowing a fireball could devastate the party, reluctantly accepts the spell duel and ups his bid to 7 dice (his max, though Bargle doesn't know that).  Bargle ups his own bid to 8 dice and Ekard declares that he will not (cannot) go any higher.  Both sides roll-off to determine who wins the duel.  Bargle rolls 6+6+3+3+3+1+1+1=24 (more than enough for the Fireball's DT). Ekard, having another bad day, rolls 4+3+3+2+2+1+1=16 and would lose the duel.  However, he decides to take 1 level of [Exhaustion](Combat.md#Exhaustion) and adds 2 more dice (his Wisdom Modifier), getting 5+4=9, bringing his total to 25.  Bargle could do the same (getting 3 dice) but he doesn't want to risk adding a Minor Magical Mishap to his outcome.  As a result, Bargle loses the duel, stopping his Fireball.  He expends 6 dice (all three '1's and all three '3's) and also suffers a [Major Magical Mishap](#Major-Magical-Mishap) (rolling a 4 for **Mage Rot**), and takes 9d4 Psychic damage, rolling 4+4+3+3+2+1+1+1+1=20.  Ekard expends 6 dice (both '3's, both '2's and both '1's) and suffers a [Minor Magical Mishap](#Minor-Magical-Mishap) (rolling 26, suffering **Witchery III**).*

As can be seen from the above example, spell duels are very risky for all parties involved.  Initiate one at your own risk.